Am I sitting close enough?
Oh, that's fine.
Correct.
Don't even worry about it.
And would you mind if I, as we speak, if I shoot a couple photographs to... No.
Go right ahead.
You've been at this position now for how long?
Well, I've been at Yale Press since August 1991.
Wow, that's... So, what is that, 14 years?
I've been editorial director since 19...
So you can really give me some sense of your thoughts on the university press, the role of university press, and in particular your vision.
I hate to use the vision word, but you sort of must pray.
I just love what you've done with the annals of communism.
If you could just talk a little bit and enter the conversation.
I've talked about these things a lot.
publicly.
A lot to talk about.
I don't know how much time you've got or how much tape you've got.
And I figured at least an hour and a half here this morning, and if we have to... I think it should all be premised with a view.
Well, first of all, let me start.
Start anywhere, and this is by the way I like to do it.
Okay.
Why don't we just...
I'm kind of feeling my way into this project, so as you can appreciate it.
I grew up in the book business, literally.
My father was a bookseller for 50 years in Chicago.
His name?
Stuart Brent.
Okay.
And he had a bookstore in Michigan, who still has a bookstore in Chicago.
Which is?
David is executive editor at the University of Chicago Press.
I've been in the book business.
all my years of my father's door surrounded by piles of partisan review.
He was having some sort of an autographing party going on upstairs.
There were two or three conflicting feelings in myself that have never gone away by things I can't understand.
And three, I have some deep connection to the life.
The only reason I'm saying this is not that I think my biography is
Well, I love it already.
Particularly important.
It is to say that I think that any view of the book business is alive with it.
For one, Jeremiah Kaplan had a completely different orientation towards the book business.
He served at a different orientation.
And Alfred Knopf, connection.
Mine came this way.
And the idea that the party is always going on upstairs,
is an important one for me because I've always wanted to get upstairs.
And I've always wanted to figure out what Partisan Review was all about.
And it wasn't until I got to college that I figured from the age of about seven to the age of 17, I had been pondering what Partisan Review was, why they were partisans and what it was all about.
It really bothered you, I mean.
It really bothered me.
And why these things were piled up in the basement of my father's store.
I couldn't get it.
But in this store, Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir came through, Seinkopf, Drew Gellington came.
In this store, Gourvidal came, Tennessee Williams.
I didn't know who they were.
It didn't make any difference.
Forty years later, I published Gore Vidal's last book.
To me, what publishing is.
You see, this is, to me, what publishing is.
Publishing is not just books.
It's not things.
To me, it's a life of getting upstairs and joining the party.
Of course, you know, the party isn't just a party of getting drunk and having fun.
To me, the party involves people like Gore Vidal.
It involves... To me, it's the party.
That's the fun.
That's the thing.
And you named all great writers, by the way, too.
I'm impressed by your choice.
Well, these are the people...
who came in along with a variety of nuts as well.
Nelson Algren, Sal Bello was always at my father's table.
Ben Hecht was always there.
Is the dad still alive, by the way?
He's still alive.
He wrote his memoir some years ago called The Seven Stairs.
Say it again?
The Seven Stairs.
It was published by Houghton Mifflin, then republished by Simon Schuster.
Anyhow, that's to me what publishing is in a nutshell.
In a nutshell.
Now, getting to it via scholarly publishing has been not so easy, because scholarly publishing was always more or less a matter of publishing.
You know, up until maybe 20 years ago, it was largely research that was done.
by scholars in areas that were abstruse by definition, specialized by definition.
Were you here when you got here?
Yes and no.
Yale provided special opportunities.
And I don't mean to jump around.
No, no, I understand that, but I think Yale was always a special kind of a place, and that had a lot to do with Chester Kerr and the original vision of what Yale University Press could be.
There's no question about it.
It was not the University of Chicago Press.
It was not.
It had a lot of different pseudopods out there.
As it still does.
As it still does, which is why I think it has a chance for becoming successful.
Before I came here, I was director of Northwestern University Press, a press that had become defunct in 1981 when I was teaching at
A friend of mine in the English department suggested that we do something.
That, you know, and... This really generated among the faculty?
Yeah, exactly.
But it was really the brainchild of it.
So we... Jerry with a G?
Jerry with a J?
Gerald.
Gerald, Gerald.
Yeah, Gerald Graff.
The opportunity, basically, to do whatever we wanted to do.
Nobody was watching, and we could do it.
He had an interest in one set of things, and I had an interest in Eastern Europe, Europe, Central Europe, Russian history, and so on and so forth.
Is that the backing of the university?
Yeah, up to a point.
I mean, financial backing as well?
No, very little financial backing, almost none.
Did they give you a list?
They gave us an office.
And they gave you the authority to use the imprint?
That's right.
And we borrowed money to pay for the books, but then we had to pay everything back.
And it was a ruse to me after 10 years of this.
And you were a kid, probably.
Pretty much.
And it was obvious to me it wasn't going anywhere, because we never were going to be able to get out of a certain rut.
And so I came here in 19... How many titles did you publish?
The first year, one.
By the time I left, David Counts Under the Skin.
It was history.
I had had connections in the literary world and so forth, but I just thought, well, you know, screw it.
I'm going to publish what I want to publish.
And so we started the Eastern-Central-European paper there.
And lo and behold, I realized I was back in the party that I was with Piotr Swarovski.
Susan Sontag and I'd been reviewing books and some of them and so forth, and I got into it.
It was wonderful.
It was huge.
And the outcome of it was that we published a... one of which was, you know, The Diary of... When we started publishing these books, they started getting attention.
Now, you have to understand, Little Northwestern University Press was publishing...
Eight books a year.
Of the eight, six of them were being reviewed in the New York Times.
It was unbelievably cool.
And we were sort of the darling of the intellectual New York crowd.
And in addition to this, my wife and I started a literary magazine, Formations, where we published work from Eastern Central Europe, along with other things,
And so, this was our first issue.
We published Arnosh Lustig, Shkvoretsky, Kundera, Ludwig Watzilic.
It was unbelievable.
People went nuts when they saw this.
And we published the work of this extraordinary Polish artist.
And so, Philip Roth got people like Susan Sontag and Cynthia Ozick, got a contribution from
Mario Puzo.
Mario Puzo even sent us money.
John Updike, Mario Puzo.
Mario Puzo.
No, because Philip Roth asked him to.
He said, look, there's this fantastic little thing going on in Chicago.
Nobody's heard of it.
They need to do it.
Have you crossed the Rubicon at this point?
I mean, teaching is now behind you publishing it.
Well, as it happens, I'm teaching again.
I teach a course up at Bard College.
It keeps you sharp.
I enjoy it.
I love it.
I love being with kids.
and teaching you is that this created a world for me.
And in 1991, in April, after we had published a Hungarian issue, oh, and one of the people we published, you know, just by happens, was Imre Kirffes.
We published his book before the Nobel Prize two years ago.
Wow.
Really bringing this little press from nowhere.
Yeah, we did it.
And how is it doing now?
Well, I'm gone...
It exists, but Knopf eventually bought the rights for Faithless a year ago, letting this go, so Yale Press is going to pick this up.
But the point is that we created a little world, and that's what I see publishing is doing, creating worlds, worlds of common interests.
And in 91, in April,
Because of the work I was doing in this area, George Soros invited me to Prague.
He knew what I was doing.
He was paying attention to it, sent me to Prague, and asked me to become director of the Central European University Press.
I was at a seminar, and George is sitting here, I'm here, other scholars are there, and somebody, a Czech scholar, is talking about doing research
in the Czech archives.
So I stopped him.
He said, the former government.
I said, you mean the former government, the former communist government of Czechoslovakia?
You are looking at those archives?
He said, yes.
I stopped them.
This is April 1991.
I said, we have to start a series and call it The Documents of Totality.
There's got to be something important in those archives worth publishing, worth knowing.
I wasn't a historian, but I knew this literature.
I knew the writing of Danilo Kish.
I knew the writing of all of those Czech writers.
I knew history, literary history.
I knew about Prague Spring.
I knew about the Hungarian.
You know, there had to be stuff in the right time.
To use the cliché, you were the right person at the right time.
At the right time, exactly.
In the right place.
And so Soros said, fine, you come up with the ideas, I'll come up with them.
That those are only a handful of the news stories that came out when we published the first book in this series.
It was a bombshell worldwide.
And that came, you see, out of my sitting in the basement in my store when I was six years old with stacks of partisan review all around me.
That's where it came from.
It didn't come out of sitting in an office and thinking about anything.
To me, that's what publishing is.
If you take that away from publishing, you have a completely sterile, meaningless, sort of non-interesting world.
But that came out of sitting in my father's basement.
And that has now led to, you know, we've now published about 15, 18 books in the series.
The publication of this book, The Secret World of American Communism, produced the opening up of the Venona files.
Now, the Venona files were something that was known to only a handful of people in the United States.
One of the people it was known to was Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
And Moynihan called me.
He wrote me a letter, out of the blue, praising the publication of this book and suggesting that we get together.
He called Harvey Clare and John Haynes and invited them to come down to Washington to testify.
Why?
In the publication of this book, which was based on the opening up of the Soviet archives and the project that we had going, what we published in that first book
plain text originals of messages that had been encoded by Soviet cryptologists and sent to the Soviet embassy in Washington and the Soviet consulate in New York City in the 30th.
The Venona Project had been trying for 40 years.
Just for the sake of my tape, explain who Soros is here.
George Soros.
This is the financier, George Soros, the guy who started Quantum Fund, the multi-billionaire.
Is he in a position to open up these files for you?
He just got me to Prague.
And he had the same money.
He's the enabler to use the jargon of time.
Yeah.
And he was, he started it up just by virtue of saying, yeah, it's a good idea.
And this, this... So he backed it?
He backed it, initially.
With money?
With money.
From the... A sum that you can tell me, or...
$36,000.
It wasn't much.
Chump change.
But it was all I needed.
For him, I mean.
It was all I needed to get started, you know, and then one thing led to another.
And what did that money allow you to do?
It enabled me to go to Moscow.
Oh, so it's really just walking, traveling money.
Yeah.
It enabled me to get to Moscow.
It enabled me to meet with the Moscow.
That's great.
The heads of the archives.
It enabled me to make the deal and have some sense that I could get more money
and make this thing work.
And what's your mindset when you go in?
I know I, as a writer, I mean, are you looking at this as a writer, as an editor, as a publisher?
I was looking at it as... Because you know a good story when you can smell it.
Yeah, that was it.
I mean, I don't know what the hell is in the files, but it's got to be good.
Exactly.
Right?
That's all I knew.
I didn't even know what the common term was when I got over there.
Wow.
All of my understanding of Soviet history came through Babel,
And Anna Akhmatova, I had no idea who Vyshinsky was.
I knew of Molotov only because of the cocktail.
And, you know, it was... But I learned.
I learned.
One thing I knew.
Oh, you learned very quickly.
I knew.
This is what I knew.
I knew that when I was a kid, I hid under desks in the basement of my school because of the Soviet Union.
What I knew was that when Sputnik went up, there was panic in my school.
How old are you?
I'm 53.
Yeah, I'll see.
But I remember sitting down in front of the television and watching the McCarthy Army hearings.
I remember my parents arguing about Alger Hiss.
I knew that this was somehow important.
That's all I knew.
But I knew it was of world importance.
I knew this history had shaped losing going away.
And the funny thing is, when we first brought that book out on Alger Hiss, The Secret World of American Communism, most people said, it's not interesting.
We know everything already.
Don't bother.
Why bring up Alger Hiss again?
It's an old, dead story.
And people thought we'd sell 2,000 copies.
People here at the press thought that.
Close to 20.
And it opened up the whole history of American Communism again.
And that was the first one?
That was the first one.
Published in?
1990.
That's correct.
You know, you can build a skyscraper in less time.
I don't think that's a long time.
Yeah.
I mean, that's publishing.
then got behind all of this.
And, you know, I'm saying this because this is the way things grow.
This is like a chain reaction and an opening up of the world university press and scholarly publishing is capable of what you think commercial publishers are.
And this is a long way around to answer your question of what I think university press is able to do.
A trade publisher would be interested in 20,000 copies.
But not the underlying idea.
But there's too much of a risk.
Too much of a roll of the dice writing on that one.
Exactly.
You're not betting on easy words on that one.
No, you're not.
And you're betting on the validity and the viability of ideas.
That's what I liked about it.
I said to myself, these are ideas.
Offering encouragement.
He opened up the Venona files.
He had the authority in, well, he, Claire and John Haynes,
He got the head of the CIA and the head of the FBI together, and they listened to what Claire and Haynes said, and they came to the conclusion, there's no point in keeping this stuff secret anymore because the jig is up.
The stuff is going to be coming out of Moscow.
How can we be keeping it secret over here?
And so he convinced them to open it up, and these files proved the spy scare in the 50s was not a fraud.
that in fact there were over 250 Soviet agents working in the State Department in Washington at that time.
And that probably is not even half the real number.
It proved that Harry Dexter White was working for the Soviets.
It proved that the creation of our intelligence was going on at a fantastic rate, right under our noses.
I mean, that's what this did.
And therefore, it opened up American history.
It opened up the history of espionage.
And it was, to me, exactly what university press publishing can do and should do.
The other thing, of course, that Moynihan did was that he endorsed the whole series.
He put me in touch with other people.
They sort of came together at the same time.
But then Bill Buckley helped me raise a great deal of money for this.
What general, like, from what kinds of sources?
Personal column.
Bill is a great guy.
I am so indebted to him, you know.
He is a great, wonderful guy.
Is he somebody I should talk to?
Absolutely, yeah.
People who think that Buckley is just an ideologue, they're wrong.
He's a very loyal, good friend.
And he called me up.
And he kept me on the phone from Davos, where he was.
He kept me on the phone for an hour.
interrogating me, basically.
Was I a Democrat or a Republican?
Was I this?
Did you answer those questions?
Absolutely.
I said, Mr. Buckley, I don't think we have a single thing politically in common.
That's the way that he said, fine.
I think Yale has been perceived, I'd tell you, of having a left-wing agenda, of course.
A left-wing agenda, and I think going back to Gaddis Smith tells me, you know, look at
I forget the name of the author, but, you know, deal stuff.
Yeah, exactly, and in the 30s.
In the 30s, and nobody would publish elsewhere, but deal, so it's published here, you know, so I mean.
So it's complicated, but that's good, because there's variety.
But so Bill said, fine, I'm going to back you, and I'm going to do two things for you.
I'm going to publish, and he wrote an article that was syndicated coast to coast.
I'll be able to get that article, I guess.
It's coast to coast.
The last line of it was, send money to Jonathan Brent.
Wow.
This was published in the press or in his magazine?
Everywhere.
It appeared in the St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, in the New York Post, because he had a syndicated column.
Every place.
So I started getting checks.
Wow.
And I'll find one check here.
It's fantastic.
I got a check from my mother's check with a letter, and a long letter saying her husband had been in the CIA and she was so grateful that I was doing God's work.
And attached to that was a pink check to me, personally, for the amount of eternal life and signed by Jesus.
You didn't surprise with that one, I guess.
No, I'm holding on to it.
I'm holding on to it, but I've still got it.
I've still got it.
But that's part of what I'm doing here.
But it's a long way around to say this is why publishing is interesting.
But how many other university presses are doing anything like that?
I mean, you're anything alone, I would imagine.
Very few.
But this is what university press publishing can do.
Bring up Yale University Press to a whole different dimension
of history, publishing in history.
And so Moynihan then sent me his next book to give you, and I was selling the paperback.
And, you know, it's just opened up huge areas of interest for American scholarship,
People come to me now and they say, well, now I can actually teach a course on this subject because you're publishing books in this area.
Yeah, you're right.
That's unique to Yale.
But Yale, and I say this over and over and over again, and even though John Ryden, now John denies this, but I know it's true.
I went to John Ryden in October 1991, where did he go?
I don't know, another press director in America.
Because people would have sat down with their calculators and they would have said, well, how much is this going to cost?
Is this a lot of money, a thousand dollars?
No, that thousand dollars wasn't.
But what are the books going to cost?
Where is the money going to come from?
How many can we possibly sell at this subject?
What do you have planned?
I couldn't imagine.
I can't imagine why this would scare people.
Oh, oh.
I suppose retrospect is... It would have scared everybody.
I could not imagine the director at Chicago.
What, an exclusive look at secret, previously secret files?
The cost of translation, the cost of doing business with them.
There were a lot of American scholars who were skeptical of whether the documents were real or not, or whether they'd all been doctored.
And what steps did you take to ensure that they were authentic?
Ultimately, the best step to take is to go and accept them as true when they trust with other materials that can be corroborated, and dealing with
I've heard touch documents that I thought were stolen.
You're the guy who's putting the deal together.
You're the deal maker.
But now, did you recruit writers to do this for you?
Yes, absolutely.
I had to recruit writers.
I had to recruit scholars.
I developed an editorial committee.
Many people told me the project wasn't impossible.
There are too many files, and so on and so forth.
I said, well, you know, if we have little teams who go in there and research,
and come up with materials and then develop them into specific kinds of things.
Did these people have to go spend extended periods of time in Russia?
Yeah, exactly.
They did.
And I had to pay for them.
And so I had to raise a huge amount of money.
How much money did you have to raise?
Over a million dollars.
And I'm in the process of raising more now.
And I got money from individuals.
Bill Buckley invited me on his television program.
And I called him up.
I said, Mr. Young.
And if Bill is behind it, then it's got to be good.
Can you believe this?
It's amazing because you have Monaghan and you have Buckley, and they are coming from two different directions.
Exactly.
And that was the beautiful thing about all of this for me, which was you could bring these people together under one key ingredient, and that's where the university stands.
was so important.
The one thing Yale Press has, and other scholarly publishers have, if they know how to use it, there is no commercial firm out there that has that any longer, with big German... Yeah, but if you think of... Yeah, I mean, but who else out there can you say, this is, you know, what was that expression?
Wands are on milk is like sterling on silver.
You know?
Who is that about today?
You can't.
But you can say it about Harvard.
You can say it about Chicago.
And that's what university publishing has.
Three very, very precious things.
Which the problem is that along with that credibility, scholarly publishing has with it the aura of difficulty.
of specialization, of really uninteresting.
The task is to find that obscure where vision comes in, but opening the door to more.
If a university press can do that, and I believe that American University Press has done that.
Are you there?
Well, we have.
I agree with that.
I've known about your books long before I was invited to come down.
But see, we have done that consciously.
That is not something that we have sought simply into.
I mean, go figure out the art books.
I mean, people publish it.
That this is a province of a university press is astonishing to me.
I know.
And that was the vision a long time ago, but we have exploited it.
I mean, I just went through the checklist for Abrams' fall list.
It's pitiful.
You know, I mean, I've been getting review books from everybody for 25, 30 years, including Yale, and your art books are absolutely... I mean, I can make the statement.
I see them all.
Not only are they beautiful, but they're scholarly, and they're important, and they're absolutely wonderful.
The Abrams list is...
crap.
It's crap.
I used to love Abrams' books.
I liked the Abbeville when Bob Abrams often did Abbeville and it was Rizzoli's books.
Rizzoli, I mean, talk about a publisher that has no credibility.
Rizzoli.
It's too bad because they did beautiful work.
They did.
But no credibility.
Key verb there is did.
Exactly.
So, you know, that's
I don't even fill out their checklist anymore.
I don't waste my time on them.
They're vapid.
As editorial director, it can't all just be these wonderful cutting-edge, hard-edge books that really give us new information on international relations and foreign policy.
It can't be.
The press would fall apart if it's the scholarly base of our publishing program, as we can make it.
And I think its program consists of between 80 and 100 books.
Is there a crime with that?
If we can survive.
Yeah.
And you were in the black last year, and you're going to be in the black again this year.
And the reason we can survive is that we have this other end to what we're doing.
We're also the trade program of the press.
But I realized when the press sort of crashed in 2000, that the art books weren't enough.
They just weren't enough.
We didn't have a trade program then.
We had some trade books, but we didn't have a trade program that had enough girth to it and weight.
The academic program was just, from a financial standpoint, 2000.
But that's for quotation, by the way.
It's financially.
You're fine with that?
Yeah.
I mean, there's no question about it.
Any publishing company in America that specializes exclusively
in the scholarly academic line is going to die.
They have such vast subsidy that they can support it.
You see, a general perception of a university press, the generic university press, is that it's intended
to operating in the red.
Yeah, exactly.
You expect that its purpose, its whole reason for existence, is to publish things that should be published, that ought to be published.
And by the way, we've got professors who are trying to get on tenure track, and maybe we should be, you know, we haven't published their stuff.
And if you have a book that does well, wonderful.
That's the perception.
And that was fine in the 50s.
the 40s, the 50s, the 60s was okay in the 70s, but the fact that Northwestern Press went out of business in 71 was a sign to a lot of presses that it wasn't going to be that okay in the future.
The scholarly community got lifted up a little bit with cultural studies and American studies, and I think that's one of the best things that Yale Press ever did.
What we didn't publish
in the 80s and the 90s.
You look at what we did not publish.
We never went down the road of a Routledge.
We never went down the road of a New York University Press or a Duke to solid, for the most part, solid scholarship, something that had grew up in this other stuff.
It never seemed viable to me, frankly.
Not really.
And although some of the books sold well, most of them are on remainder tables now.
those subsidies have dried up, and universities are much less willing to give them, on the one hand, and on the other hand, supporting a big publishing operation, sustaining it, takes more than most of the subsidies can cover now.
Look at NEH, there goes your Mark Twain program out in California.
That's right.
I've talked to them, and you can do these electronic
things, but can we really justify these things?
You have a few of these projects that have gone on for 50 years.
The Johnson, the Edwards, all of them.
And how do you weigh in on them?
They are all fully funded.
So they're fine.
They're fine.
Roll for them if they're... That's, you know, somebody's got to pay for it.
The idea that this kind of scholarship is a good in itself is bad.
And it may be a good in itself I'm not disputing it. I don't want to dispute it at all. Something that is a good in itself doesn't necessarily have viability in the marketplace, and if it doesn't have viability in the marketplace, the whole organization is going to crash, and then that good in itself is going to remain ther, but it's going to remain in a rubble a pile of rubble, and nobody's going to see it, so we have to keep the the the basic
foundation, the structure of the company, solid.
So the likelihood that we will ever see a Lefty Lewis Wallace Walpole project?
It's possible.
I mean, if somebody is as willing as he was.
Yeah.
But who ever heard of the idea that scholarship was something that was of commercial?
I mean, to say that a scholarly program should be self-supporting is to... That goes back to my point of a few minutes ago, I mean.
It's just... It was expected that it wasn't.
It's self-contradictory.
So then somebody's got to pay for it.
And in the 60s, of course, there was a huge amount of government money.
The Cold War kept the engines hot for American...
competitiveness brought an end to a lot of public funding for all these things.
These Harvard, Cornell, Princeton, MIT, Columbia, all buy three copies of any book that was published.
Now they have the witches in the Nordic fairy tale that have one eye, and they share it among them.
And that's what they do now.
They buy one book now.
The Five College Consortium up in Western Mass is the
crime example.
Exactly.
Smith buys and Amherst won't.
Precisely.
But the book costs as much now or more to publish than it did 20 years ago.
We're cooked.
But the point is somebody has to pay for it.
Somebody has to pay for it.
And you can't get something for nothing.
And if nobody's willing to pay for it,
then you ain't going to get it.
And it doesn't make any difference how glorious and how valuable in and of itself it is to study Marvell's diaries from 1627.
It just doesn't make any difference.
It may be the most important thing this young scholar could ever conceivably do, but it ain't going to happen.
So you said in your board meetings,
And so the worthiness of the project is no longer enough to justify its publication?
No, we... Like University Press-like?
That's right.
And the reason for this is simple.
There are a million worthy projects.
But you still made decisions based on... Yeah.
So we have become much more attuned to, does this project help
construct a list, a presence, as opposed to good scholarship.
Is it at the very top?
Well, how do you ever know if something is at the very top?
It's if somebody says so.
I really cannot assess a book on Renaissance
literature.
People working out here.
Exactly.
Right.
Yeah.
And yet, all of these people working out here have their own personal agendas, and they really know, but at least you have to do the best that you can.
You have to do the best that you can.
And so, we are constantly being accused of sacrificing...
Give me, if you don't mind, can you give me an example of this?
Well, from other, without saying who makes the allegation, but from scholars.
But can you give me an idea, you know, what kinds of books they're talking about, the bicycle book?
Well, yeah, they don't like it.
I like the bicycle book.
Yeah, exactly.
It's a good book.
I reviewed it, in fact.
Yeah.
You know, it's the kind of book that you wouldn't necessarily, a trade publisher, I thought, what a
Exactly, but they won't do that now.
But, for instance, there are people who, for instance, object to, let's say, are having published this.
Or why?
Well, it's not scholarship.
Erasmus is not scholarship?
See, it's not scholarship.
Well, it's a scholarly way.
Yeah.
It's a great book, I guess.
But what contribution is being made to scholarship?
Here's my argument.
It's very simple.
And if this counts for vision, maybe it is.
But my argument is that if you took these books out of the core curriculum of most, nobody would read Melville.
Nobody would read Melville.
And profiled in my new book, by the way.
Oh, yeah.
That's exactly what he said.
It's the honest to God truth.
The university is really the marketplace for so many of these books.
It is.
And we don't realize that we're living in the new dark ages.
Yeah.
We are living.
And the universities are these little islands where things like this happen.
And if the universities let this go, and we don't bring out a new edition of Erasmus or a new edition of Utopia, who is going to do it?
But then that's my next question.
Is this the only imprint edition in English of the title?
No, it's not.
It's not.
But it has a good introduction, and it has books and so on and so forth.
So there is a little scholarship.
There is scholarship, and the point of it is that we are helping to disseminate this traditional scholarship, but we're keeping a tradition alive.
That seems to me as much... But I have to believe that a book such as that is
It's got to have a pretty good sale to justify its existence.
Fair.
But I'll give you another example.
Newman's The Idea of the University.
We have this series called Rethinking of the Western Tradition, which some years ago... ...of books in which we take basic texts and really subject them to...
I'm just reading from the Indian University, again, John Lockhart.
Yeah, you've got a couple of them.
Culture and Anarchy, Social Contract, and so on.
And there are, I don't know, about a dozen of these now.
And is the name of the series?
The Rethinking the Western Tradition series.
The interesting thing is that when we, I mean, coming back to the idea of how much of this information is out there in the world, when we republish the idea of the university,
There was no other edition out there.
Well, that kind of goes back to the question.
It was interesting, exactly.
This is out of point.
It means this language, right?
Yeah.
Now there is another one.
I think Notre Dame has an edition.
Which makes sense.
They've raised books.
Oh, yeah.
They do.
And there's a lot there.
They're a very tight little list, but there are a number of things on there.
But it's focused, and it's according to the
the mandate of that institution.
University of Kansas, your idea of this series is to ask, in every case, why do we need to read this book?
Who cares?
Who cares about Arnold's ideas about culture today?
Does anybody care about them?
Does anybody care whether culture is doing what one likes or doing what reason says?
So who inaugurated this?
And that was when?
That was back in the early 90s.
And I inaugurated it.
About the same time you're doing the pretty ballsy things if you're doing here at the same time, you know?
Yeah, I guess so.
But, you know, it seems to me— You don't think of it in those terms?
I don't think of it in those terms.
I think of it in terms of—I see the Western tradition as being under attack.
I have a chapter with Harold Bloom and Ellen Fendler.
I happen to agree with them, which is why I chose them for this book.
You know, the Western tradition is not one thing.
It's a variety of things.
It's a self-contradictory tradition.
I got interested in this through my work with the Soviet Union.
I'll tell you something.
When I came back from
Moscow that first time, there is no more. Yeah exactly. Uh getting off an airplane surrounded by uh all of a sudden in an environment in which you cannot say certainly all of, the echo of a police state was still there, and I knew this was not Soviet Union circa 1978. This was you know in some way
And it seemed to me it was well worth trying to think about what is worth preserving in the Western tradition.
And not with a political agenda, but the leading ideologies of the last 20 years have been that it's really oppressive at proving that the West is just this colonialist, imperialist, and so on and so forth.
things that are virtues in the tradition.
This may be the only virtue of it.
The toleration of dissent.
This may be the only ultimate virtue.
So did you articulate this at a board meeting here?
Yeah, and that's why we started this series.
And did you have specific titles in mind, or was it just a general conceptual proposal?
No, we had specific titles in mind.
I wanted to start with Culture and Anarchy, a work that is universally despised today, because it sort of stands up for high culture.
And high culture has been discredited and kicked around.
by feminists and by, you know, maybe there is something to just getting back to basic ideas as, you know, should your life doing what you want or doing what reason says to figure out what this is all about?
And we're still thinking about this in different ways.
We've put together some essays, some prose, some contra.
And how many in the series, would you say, right now?
I think we've got about ten books in the series now.
And surprisingly, this lock has
has pretty much outsold everything with the exception of The Prince by Machiavelli.
Here are a couple more.
On Liberty by Mill, Sesame and the Lilies, Ruskin.
Yeah, I really am very, very invested in this.
And I see this as sort of
I think this is what universities are for, frankly.
And they're all paperbacks?
They're all paperbacks.
There are four courses, and to our delight, we discover that, in fact, there are a lot of courses that use them now.
Huge quantities, maybe 2,500 copies a year.
Well, in some cases, we've paid for new translations in some cases, but yeah.
Do they get a standard royalty, just out of curiosity?
Some do, yeah.
Some do.
The editors do, but the contributors get flat fees.
You know, I could keep talking.
Tell me what your schedule is, by the way.
My schedule is that I have lunch date at
I have another interview coming up in a little while.
So I realize that I haven't really talked about much of a vision.
We'll have another conversation.
But to sort of preview that, my feeling was that the press had to diversify its program.
And you felt this mindfully coming in.
Yeah, very mindfully.
That dawned on you as you were...
No, it was very obvious to me in the mid-'90s that we had to develop.
I didn't know what the curve or the arc for the art books was going to be, but in the end.
Has it recovered?
Yeah, this past year it's recovered, but it was a very sanative form.
We couldn't predicate the financial stability of this organization.
on one list.
That was a phrase we don't use, but... No, we have to have streams of revenue.
And so when I became editorial director... Right, and so the rethinking books or textbooks... My daughter, who's a French teacher, knows your French textbook.
Sure, French in Action.
And now we have a whole bunch of new things coming with me, if you have a second stop.
Well, finally, you know, it has taken us five years to get a program really underway.
But now we've got some stuff here that will help to solidify the financial base of this organization for a long time.
So we have a book learned.
This is the first to read Latin.
This is the first Latin textbook since we lost.
We have functional, modern, standard...
Arabic for beginners.
Right.
Ma-D-M-A-H-D-I-A-L-O-S-H.
Yeah.
And then this is Spanish for health professionals.
Right.
So we really are becoming our only specialized.
Yeah.
And we've got a beginning Italian coming down the pipe, and we've got a beginning Spanish.
No.
At the same time that we have those... I'll just drive you crazy and you see it.
Give me the creeps around.
All right, let's see.
What are you going to do?
Let's see.
You know, we want publishing... Ron Kulka has started these with introductions by Harold Bloom.
These are annotated...
editions of Shakespeare and to our delight, we're finding that they're being used in courses now. Uh yeah design matters here. Oh absolutely, absolutely, and so that's another part of the operation that I think is really um uh this whole thing work which is getting the design credibility that we've got
So these are tasteful books.
I've written a couple of books, and my first one's basically written about special collections in universities.
You ask, or you wonder, vaguely, do the things that we're gathering in some way support the curriculum?
A university press doesn't necessarily have to think about that.
Well, we do think about it.
You do?
Oh, yeah.
And we're thinking about it more and more.
Out there in an universal sense or at Yale?
Well, in both cases.
In both cases.
But Yale is not representative of anything.
Whereas Ohio State is representative, much more fortunately.
I mean, it simply is the case that as people are much more idiosyncratic, they teach their courses in non-state institutions, they
need to feel. When we look at a book like this for instance we have it revealed will be the Ivies, but we have to get representation from the big ten we have to get representation from reliable idea, and it may be that we will publish a book, that it will only work in the advanced bars at the Ivies and we'll be content to say okay we'll sell a hundred of these a year. Yeah? sure.
Well, really, yeah, that will be it.
That will be it.
It's scary, all right.
But, for instance, our executive editor in history came from Oxford.
He had been vice president.
They were planning for a Milton...
They did the research that I'm describing to you.
You can be an English major today and not be required to know Milton.
That's scary.
And Chaucer.
And Chaucer is going the same way.
Yeah, that's right.
Mallory is... Oh, forget Mallory.
Forget Mallory, forget Marvell.
Yeah, but you can go to Brown,
one of the great schools, and get a degree in English.
You support yourself to be a teacher of English in Qualified Center.
It comes back to what I was saying about living in the dark ages.
It really is.
We'll talk at length about that in my new book.
Oh, yeah?
Well, there's this illusion of illumination.
That's the result.
It's a virtual world, and it creates a virtual world.
It keeps repeating itself, by the way.
You might think you'll get 1,500 hits, which in some way validates.
Right.
But all you find is that they're repeating each other.
Misinformation.
It's very seductive, I know, as a writer and as a researcher to say, I'm looking for this quote by Chekhov on being a physician and a writer, and they don't give me the source for it.
And finally having to go to the letters myself and finding it, finding it really is somewhat different from the one that's out there.
I still believe in books, and the reason I believe in books is I watch the behavior of my children.
And when they go to bed at night, they do not take their computer to bed with them.
The book, it's not a teddy bear.
What else do you take to bed with you except for a book?
A book.
And when my boy goes to bed at night, he's reading a book.
He falls asleep with his head on that book.
In ten years, he'll fall asleep with his head on some young woman's shoulder.
But right now, it's a book.
And that book is impregnated into him somehow.
That is beyond just a tool for extracting information.
It has become part of his nervous system.
Now, I'm not saying that everybody grows up this way.
But there are still lots of kids for whom that is a very... My new book is a whole examination class and reach out and read.
and this whole concept of pediatry, quite a really very articulate and brilliant woman.
We were talking mainly about kids that are, have a greater facility, apparently many of them with the computer than they do with books.
I said, would you use computers instead of books?
She was in a heartbeat if they worked, but she said, try and get a six-month-old to reach out and grasp a computer and measure
what a child who's being read aloud to from age six months to the age of five, the one who's been exposed to books, how much advanced that child is.
It's all measurable.
I'll tell you something else.
I don't know all the data, and it's purely my own anecdotalism.
My son's computer breaks down.
He goes into a panic.
I do, too.
Yeah, they panic.
They panic.
Exactly.
You panic.
I do.
Why?
Yeah, exactly.
You do.
You never... You don't have that kind of a relationship to a book.
A book calms you down.
It calms you.
Why?
That's really very good.
Because you are coming back in touch with yourself.
You're coming today...
wrote this down and this.
I lost the file.
Oh, God.
I go nuts.
A chapter that I've actually destroyed.
Out of five books I've written now, I've probably had three chapters that I've totally erased through stupid work that you have intelligence to print the goddamn thing out.
I have a high copy there.
And I'm going to rewrite it.
And I have to say, at every instance, I rewrote it better.
You don't think that's going to happen.
I know you're a busy guy.
I'd like to... How about one question, and then a little critical mass of tapes here, and then I'm going to go through them.
If you were... You have a great opportunity.
You've been at the press for 1450, centennial history of the press.
What would you like to see
If you were to pick up, I think that I like to write books to people.
Sure.
I'm looking for it.
I love taking on this project, by the way, because nobody expects anything out of it.
Right.
They all think it's going to be a little book of a thousand copies with the expectation that nobody's going to read them.
Well, I think... I'm looking for stories, and I'm looking for... I think that Yale has a special history.
at the right place at the right time in Prague in 91.
I think Yale, we were in the 50s.
But Yale is here now, and we're a way toward a new kind of university publishing in America.
It keeps me here.
That's why I'm interested.
And I think that our ability to do that goes way back.
I think it goes back to what was going on here in the 30s.
I think we should have tolerated it was happenstance, but it doesn't just happen.
You have to be open to having luck.
We've developed that.
I'm not quite sure.
But part of it has to do with the fact that all University Press was the first publisher of the book.
I don't know.
But that is something that has to go on.
Not ABC of learning, but ABC of reading.
And we published Pound's other book.
I can't remember what it was.
Divigation.
There are two books by Ezra Pounder.
And you can find them out there.
Now, unfortunately, found a copy of the ABC of Reading myself.
Well, unfortunately, I showed it to a couple of other people, so I don't know if it's still on the shelf, but it's got to be someplace, because this is worth a million dollars, this book.
And you will appreciate this as a bibliophile.
Can you imagine a first edition of Ezra Pond's ABC of Reading, published by Yale University Press?
Then, in 1941 or 42, because of Ponce, fascist director of Yale University Press wrote him a personal letter to be associated with a man of the... And will I look for this?
Yeah, I think I can show you where to look for it.
And we repudiated the rights.
Really?
It's not a proud moment.
No.
It's a stupid moment.
But then we published it.
I thought we were going to have a great moment of... No, it was a moment.
It's not a profile of courage.
Well, I mean, we repudiated the rights on patriotic grounds.
So, I don't know.
I guess that's a good moment.
But the book went on to sell millions of copies, obviously.
And not by other people.
Oh, yeah.
Of course.
But we also...
I love the story of Long Day's Journey and Tonight.
Long Day's Journey and Tonight is a great story.
We published Heidegger, Heidegger's Introduction to Metaphysics.
I'm trying to find a copy here.
Now, on the last page of that particular book, the second to last page of that particular book, Heidegger, that the spiritual, the inner, and I'm quoting almost verbatim.
I wish I could find it.
spiritual greatness of national socialism has yet to be understood.
Brucey Press publishes that book.
Wow.
After having repudiated Ezra Pound.
Yeah.
Wow.
Wow is right.
So this is... How did you find these little... Tidbits on it?
Curiosity, yeah.
Well, of course, I had read Heidegger, and I knew what was in the book, and I was delighted to find that Yale was the publisher of it.
And then you just followed it.
And then I followed it.
And it turns out that Yale was the publisher of that book because of the intervention of Hannah Arendt.
Why would she intervene on its behalf?
Because at that time, Hannah Arendt was trying to get Heidegger, after the war, to read.
Why didn't we have correspondence here?
I don't know.
I've never looked into it.
So, like, when, where would I, what period would I be looking at?
I'm not even sure, but it's got to be...
Well, you could go back and look at the correspondence relating to the original publication of Heidegger.